[Applause]
My book is called the emperor of all
malades and this
and it's a history of cancer and the
first question that people ask me is why
I wrote the book and I was an onc I am
an oncologist I treat cancer patients
and I spend
most of my life as a researcher. I'm a
stem cell scientist. Um, and then I was
in training in cancer medicine in Boston
when a patient of mine who had an
aggressive variant of abdominal cancer
and she had responded and relapsed and
responded and relapsed. Um, and then she
at one point of time she stopped and she
said, "Sid, I'm willing to go on with
trials and drugs and therapies, but
before I do that, I need to know what it
is that I'm fighting."
And it was a very humbling and a moving
moment for me because I realized that
not only could I not answer that
question as an oncologist, I couldn't
point her to a single book or a resource
that would answer the question in the
fullest sense possible. What it was,
what was it that she was fighting? How
old was it? Since when has it begun to
envelop our lives in the way it does
today? Where are we going? What happens
next? And and how how did we get here?
How do we get in this moment of time
with cancer
being what it is? And just just so that
no one thinks for a second that this is
an abstuse problem, I' I'd just like to
point out some numbers. I mean, I won't
go through all these figures, but just
to let you know that there is no doubt
statistically that cancer will envelop
each and every one of our lives. And if
you go to amazon.com or something, you
will find 5,000 books about cancer. And
for the most part, they're of the
variety, oh, you know, eat celery and
eat carrots and you'll cure colon
cancer. And I began to find these books
somewhat insulting actually. So I wrote
this book really to answer the question
and as I said to fill up a vacuum that
existed in this history, in the history
of cancer. Um there's a famous saying by
uh Hillary who climbed Everest um and
when he was asked well why did you climb
Everest and he said as you very famously
know because it was there and so this
book doesn't have any pretensions of
being the climb of Mount Everest but
really I I wrote this book because it
was not there and the fact that it was
not there made it impossible for me not
to write the book. The book was driven
by that urgency the urgency that Andrew
and others have felt when cancer
envelops our lives. So I can't summarize
the entire book. It's a 600page book. I
wish you I hope you read it. But I'll
tell you a little story about the book
and through that story perhaps a story
about how the book was written. And in
the end I want to spend a few minutes
maybe reading a single uh page from the
book just to give you a sense of of how
such a book is ever written. So my story
begins um with the main character in
this book Sydney Farber. Um, some of you
might have been to Boston, went to the
Dana Farber Cancer Institute and
wondered who Dana Farber was. There is
no Dana Farber. It was Charles Dana and
Sydney Farber, two separate individuals.
Um, Sydney Farber was a pathologist
and uh, he uh, had a tiny basement
laboratory at the bottom of Children's
Hospital, a freezing uh, about 20T x 14t
space uh, full of the smell of formula.
And I've been inside that space. it's
virtually unlivable. And um he was a
pathologist so he essentially only saw
the bodies of children. Children would
be wheeled down after they were dead
into this freezing basement and then he
would perform autopsies. But then Sydney
Farber had a hunger and it was that
hunger actually which drew to to drew
him me to him when I first started this
book. He began to have this hunger about
treating patients. And remember this is
1947 and acute leukemia in children.
Acute lymphablastic leukemia was not
just a virtually incurable form of
cancer. It was a lethal form of cancer
in its in its speed. Children would be
diagnosed on Monday and would be dead by
Friday and two four six year old
children. And Farber became very
interested in acute lymphablastic
leukemia for a single reason and that
was that of all the very many forms of
cancer it had one advantage and that was
that it could be measured and science
always begins with measurement and
because you could draw blood from a
child you could figure out this is the
age before cat scans this is before MRI
so you can't quantify the growth or the
death of an internal tumor but you can
quantify the growth growth and death of
a blood tumor because you can draw a
drop of blood and you can look at it as
a pathologist would under microscope. So
Farber became obsessed with
lymphablastic leukemia and he had a very
important clue and that clue came from a
very interesting lady Lucy Wills a
little bit forgotten in history uh an
English hematologist who became
interested in finding out uh the cause
of various forms of anemia. uh
interesting lady, eccentric um she um
went to India to investigate a
particular form of anemia which no one
had seen before or no one had really
understood before and this anemia was
predominantly present in pregnant women
who were malnourished. So she was very
interested in why pregnant women who
were malnourished they lived in a fac
you know these the factory workers had
this very peculiar form of anemia and
here this is a little note from her um
again you see her writing anemia uh
pregnancy and then she made a very
important discovery she saw that if you
fed these women Marmite Marmite
she fed these women Marmite the anemia
would recover so she became interested
in this idea that marmite must have some
hidden substance
which was responsible for the recovery
of the anemia and she didn't eventually
figure it out but very soon chemists had
broken Marmite down into its various
components and of course that substance
turned out to be folic acid folate so
Wills essentially figured out that
deficiencies of folic acid which is a
vitamin can cause can block the growth
of normal blood and Farber who knew of
Will's work began to wonder could an
antifolic acid drug block the growth of
drug of of a blood cancer.
And so Farber had a friend u another uh
interesting character who we talk about
in the book. He was an Indian chemist
lived alone in Boston who had begun to
manufacture the series of antifolates. A
series of accidents had allowed him to
manufacture these antifolates and he
began to administer two and four and six
year old kids with acute lymphablastic
leukemia with antifolates. these
antifolates that yellow had yellow
subber was the name of the chemist had
made. I'm going to tell you a story
about how this book is or how a book
like this is written because it's the
story about the discovery of the first
patient who got these antifolates. Um, I
became obsessed with finding the child,
the first child who got antifolds and
had a remission because every time I
would feel the pulse of this book, you
know, at 600 pages, every time I'd feel
the pulse of this book begin to drop,
the my instinct was always to find the
patient. Find the patients and their
stories will finish the story of the
book for you. So, I began to be obsessed
with finding the patient who had and I
knew only the following piece of
information. I knew that his name was RS
and that he was 2 and a half years old,
lived in Boston and nothing else in 1948
and had died after one or three months,
one to three months of remission. So I
began to post um on various list serves,
you know, if you had I knew you had a
twin, if you had a twin with leukemia in
1948, please write to me, you know, I
began to post in various settings.
Nothing
months, nothing. So I got very
disheartened and I said um I I took a
vacation. I went back to India to my
parents house and um someone said to me,
"Oh, you know the chemist who had
synthesized the folates Yala Subarrow
had a single biographer u the biographer
lives about four blocks from my house in
Delhi." So said I said why not I'll go
meet the biographer. So, so I walk over
four blocks from Delhi, a thousand miles
away from Boston and the biographer
tells me, "Oh, you know, in 1950, um, I
went to uh the Sydney Farber Cancer
Hospital, and I have a roster of all the
patients who were treated with
leukemia."
So, so here here I was, as I said, a
thousand miles away and I said, "Can I
see that roster?" And, and there it was,
Robert Sandler. and he said, "Oh, you
know, there was an article about Robert
Sandler in the Boston Sunday Herald of
1948."
Um, and I said, "Uh, show me the
article." And he said, "Oh, you have to
go find it." So, I ran back. I mean,
actually, I really flew back to Boston,
but I could have run back to Boston and
I went to the library, uh, which was
became my haven while I was writing this
book, and I found in a few minutes that
I was staring at Robert Sandler's face.
And there there's Robert Sandler. Um,
and um, and using his name, I could then
go back to the directory of uh, the
Boston uh, directory and find the name
of his parents and because I knew that
the the child was the child of a ship
worker and in about 20 minutes from now,
I was back where I had started, but I
was in the house of Robert Sandler.
So, I'm just telling you that story
because that story became metaphorical
for me about how a book like this is
written. Um
Farber uh was a scientist as I said he
was in the laboratory but then he made a
very critical ally and that was Mary
Lazer. Here's Mary Lazer, a legendary
socialite um a person who uh could have
had so many connections that u she
basically knew everyone in this room by
their first name. She uh she was uh
glamorous. She was independent. She was
an entrepreneur, very unusual for her
time, independently wealthy because she
had started her own entrepreneurial
ventures. And you know, this is Mary
Lasker and you might think for a second
that she's being photographed at the
Museum of Modern Art, but make no
mistake that Monae probably belongs to
her. So, so um so there she is, Mary
Lasker. Mary Laskan Farber teamed up and
she and Farber began to put pressure on
the nation, particularly on Nixon. And
this advertisement appeared in 1969. And
this really marks the beginning of the
war on cancer. And so Mr. Nixon, you can
cure cancer. And there's a subtext there
which says, wouldn't it be very nice to
cure cancer? Cure cancer by America's
200th birthday.
So that birthday, as you know, has gone
and passed. And
where are we today? Now before we go on,
let me spend one second reminding you
that this is the 1950s and 1960s.
America is about to land a man on the
moon. Um the Manhattan project which is
a long inheritance has been phenomenally
successful. So imagine the hubris of
this minute of this moment. Um here are
Farber and Mary Alaska who want to cure
cancer by America's 200th birthday. And
as someone said it to me that is almost
like landing a rocket on the moon
without knowing Newton's laws. But there
they were and we have to be thankful to
them for it. Uh what happens next is
that there was an enormous expansion in
the budget of the National Cancer
Institute and we see this rising up from
the 1970 onward. That arrow marks the uh
that arrow marks the moment that the uh
war on cancer was launched and the
question you might ask yourself is well
what happened and the answer is for a
long time not very much happened. This
is this next slide shows the uh cancer
related deaths if uh divided in various
age ranges between 1955 and 2004. And
the first thing that you see is that
between 1970 odd to 1980 give or take a
few years the death rate was static for
most age groups and if anything the
death rate was rising
but then things started turning around
and in the last part of the book I talk
about what happens next. And one of the
things that's happened next is visible
in this slide. So this is a a slide that
plots the total cancer mortality in in
the US over several decades bringing us
actually right up to 2006 in this case
divided into men and women. And first
thing you notice of course is the cancer
rates are the cancer deaths are rising.
This is largely because of the aging
population overall and because the
population is increasing. So this is a
natural rise. But what's very gratifying
of course is that you find that about
1990s
2000s you see this plateauing effect.
Now importantly that plateauing effect
hasn't turned around and one of the
great challenges of our generation is to
turn that plateau of cancer around.
Now h how are we going to do this? Uh I
don't know but there has been an
explosion in understanding
in the understanding of the cancer cell.
So if you return back to my original
analogy now we finally know Newton's
laws. Now that doesn't mean that we can
land a rocket on the moon but the
knowledge of even the glimpse of
Newton's laws makes a huge difference.
This is a slide that I borrowed from
Bert Voggelstein very important cancer
researcher which talks about the
mutations in the cancer genome. This is
called the landscape of the cancer
genome. I'd like us to get very familiar
with this landscape because this is
going to haunt us in our lives. So
here's here's a way that Rogelstein
depicts it. He's basically put every
gene on the sheet of paper and he's
marked out for a given individual
cancer. He's marked out every mutation
in a white dot and in these peaks and
the red peaks and mountains are those
white dots across a 100 or 200 odd
samples from the same cancer. And what
we learned from this slide? We learned
something very important. Number one, we
learned that there are there is an
overlap for a single cancer between one
dot and the peak, which means that in a
single form of in a single cancer in a
single colurectal cancer, there is an
overlap between its mutation and the
most common mutations across a 100
samples. But we also learned something
very troubling and that is if you look
there are many white dots that do not
correspond to peaks and that means every
single colurectal cancer this is not
even I'm not talking across different
cancers every single colurectal cancer
therefore contains a heterogeneity of
mutations and again I point this out
using some examples right here. So
should we be dejected and stop? No,
because it turns out that some mutations
in cancers are more important than
others. And some mutations, if you
target them with the appropriate kind of
drug, you can get uh an amazing clinical
response. And again, I was obsessed in
this book at finding the first patients.
And so here is Barbara Bradfield. She
actually sent me this picture. Barbara
Bradfield is the longest survivor of her
septin treatment. She is an iconic
patient. She's someone that history will
remember because she gave up her time
and her potentially her life to enroll
in the first trial of herception. She's
still alive today. She had metastatic
breast cancer.
Um so in conclusion, what does this book
tell us? This book tells us that we are
in in this this battle for a very long
time, but an enormous amount of
resources are going to be deployed in
order to battle this very elemental and
magisterial illness. So I'm going to now
turn and just read you uh the very last
page of my book. Um and again uh as a
reminder of what lies ahead perhaps. Uh
this is the story of Germaine. I've
changed the names and dates of the
patients in this book uh to protect uh
privacy. But this is the story of
Germaine, a woman who had relapsed many
many times uh with abdominal cancer. had
an had an incredible response to a
particular drug and had stretched out a
relapse sorry response for about six and
a half years and then finally relapsed
again.
Uh when I recall that final conversation
with Germaine, embarrassingly enough the
object seemed to stand out more vividly
than the words. A hospital room with its
sharp smell of disinfectant and hand
soap. The steely unflattering overhead
light. a wooden side table on wheels
piled with pills, books, newspaper
clippings, nail polish, jewelry,
postcards. Her room wallpapered with
pictures of her beautiful house in
Montgomery and of her daughter holding
some fruit picked from her garden. A
standard issue plastic hospital picture
filled with a bunch of sunflowers
perched on a table by their side.
Germaine, as I remember her, was sitting
by the bed, one leg dangling casually
down, wearing her usual eccentric and
arresting combination of clothes and
some large and unusual pieces of
jewelry. Her hair was carefully
arranged. She looked formal, frozen, and
perfect, like a photograph of someone in
the hospital waiting to die. She seemed
content. She laughed. She joked.
She made wearing a nasogastric tube seem
effortless and somehow dignified.
Only years later in writing this book
could I finally put into words why that
meeting left me so uneasy and humbled.
Why the gestures in that room seemed
larger than life. Why the object seemed
like symbols. Why Germaine herself
seemed like an actor playing a part.
Nothing I realized was incidental. The
characteristics of Germaine's
personality that had once seemed
spontaneous and impulsive were in fact
calculated and almost reflexive
responses to her illness. Her clothes
were loose and vivid because they were
decoys against the growing outline of
the tumor in her abdomen. Her necklace
was distractingly large so as to pull
attention away from her cancer. Her room
was topsyturvy with bobbles and
pictures. The hospital flacked
to the wall because without them it
would devolve into the cold anonymity of
any other room in any other hospital.
She had dangled her leg at that precise
posed angle because the tumor had
invaded her spine and begun to paralyze
her other leg, making it impossible to
sit any other way. Her her casualness
was studied. The jokes were rehearsed.
Her illness had tried to humiliate her.
It had made her anonymous and seemingly
humorless. It had sentenced her to die
in unsightly death in a freezing
hospital room thousands of miles away
from home. But she had responded with
vengeance, moving always to be one step
ahead, trying to outwit it.
It was like watching someone locked in a
chess game. Every time Germaine's
disease moved, imposing yet another
terrifying constraint on her, she made
an equally assertive movement in turn.
The illness acted, she reacted. It was a
morbid hypnotic game, a game that had
taken over her life. She dodged one blow
only to be caught by the other. She too
was like Carol's Red Queen, stuck
peddling furiously just to keep in the
same place.
Germaine seemed that evening to have
captured something essential about our
struggle against cancer.
That to keep keep pace with this malady,
you need to keep inventing and
reinventing, learning and unlearning
strategies.
Germaine fought cancer obsessively,
cannilally, desperately, fiercely,
madly, brilliantly, and zealously, as if
channeling all the fierce inventive
energy of generations of men and women
who would who had fought cancer in the
past and would fight it in the future.
Her quest for a cure had taken her on a
strange and limitless journey through
internet blogs and teaching hospitals
and chemotherapy and clinical trials
halfway across the country through a
landscape more desolate, desperate, and
disquing than she had imagined. She had
deployed every last morsel of her energy
to the quest, mobilizing and
remobilizing the last dregs of her
courage, summoning her will and wit and
imagination until that final evening she
had stared into the vault of her
resourcefulness and found it empty. In
that haunted last night, hanging on to
her life by no more than a tenuous
thread, summoning all her strength and
dignity as she wheeled herself to the
privacy of her bathroom. It was as if
she'd encapsulated the essence of a
4,000-year-old war. Thank you.